# Velum

A very simple blog engine: it reads your page templates and Markdown posts and
combines them into a full blog site, which it serves either directly or via
something like nginx. The idea is to be as minimal and lightweight as possible,
while still providing a decent blog experience for your readers.

Live example: <https://blog.andyf.me/> running behind Nginx.

## In-memory Storage

For performance reasons, rather than load the article file from the filesystem
each time it's needed, the articles are read once on startup from
`content/articles` and stored in memory. The title and tags are also extracted
from each article, using the assumption that the first line is of the format `#
Article Title`, and tags are on the second line, in the form `|these, are,
some, tags|`. A 'slug', i.e. a simplified version of the title, is also
generated, for use in URL routing, along with a timestamp, and all of these are
stored with the title-less content.

## Comments

There is a fairly basic commenting system in place that simply stores comment
author name, their URL (optional), and a plain-text comment limited to 3000
characters (not configurable yet).

While comments are also stored in memory while the server is running, they are
also backed up to a file (`content/comments.jsonl` by default) so they can be
restored if the server needs to be restarted. The format, JSONL, is
a line-based variant of JSON â€“ each line is its own independent JSON object
representing a single comment.

Comments are rate-limited by IP address, to prevent some potential abuse. The
limit is 2 seconds, and not currently configurable. There are some other
options I want to explore in this area, including possible cookie-based
'authentication', and more.

Comments are also write-only, and I'm not sure whether this is something I want
to expand on. Making comments editable means implementing a whole system of
user accounts, login, etc., and I'm just not sure it's worth the extra
complication for what's supposed to be a lightweight blog engine.

## Getting started

Assuming you have a functional Rust environment, you can compile and run the
server with `cargo run`. On startup the articles files are read, as described
above, and the Handlebars templates are read from `content/templates`. If
running in development mode, the templates are not cached, and are re-read each
time they're needed. At the moment this setting is controlled directly in the
source code, but in future it will be controllable using a command-line
argument (see To Do, below).

Once the server has started, visit <http://localhost:3090/> in your browser to
see the index page, showing a list of articles. The default is 10 per page,
adjustable via `Settings.toml` along with a couple of other things.

## Running in production

Production use is basically the same as development use, at present. In the
future there may be options for running daemonised, or as a system service.

## To Do

1. Since removing the reliance on Redis, it's become clear that there's no
   proper handling of duplicate slugs/titles. While this shouldn't really be
   a problem, and nothing will *break*, exactly, it's obviously not ideal, and
   a solution needs to be found.

2. Rebuilding the article database: adding a new article currently means
   restarting the server is necessary in order for it to be included in the
   article list, but  this obviously means downtime, and is not great from a UX
   perspective. A better option would be a way to send a special HTTP request
   to the server that signals it to rebuild, possibly via an admin page of some
   kind. There is already code in place to rebuild the article cache, so it's
   mostly a matter of wiring it up to a UI.

3. Then there's the question of an editor: does Velum even need one? If not,
   what about a simplified way to upload content, that means users don't have
   to manually copy files (including images) to their server? As with the
   server restart issue, this is about UX for the blog maintainer, obviating
   the need for SSHing into the server and other such disagreeableness.

4. RSS: it feels a bit like a niche thing these days, but plenty of people
   still use RSS, myself included, so I want to include it.
